docs(components): update documentation on components (#1583)
AmadeusITGroup/otter: docs/configuration/OVERVIEW.md

# Configuration mechanism

> The aim of this document is to help developers to implement `Configuration` inside components, in order to be compliant with __CMS architecture__.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The aim of this document is to help developers to implement `Configuration` inside components, in order to be compliant with the __CMS architecture__.
```

> The aim of this document is to help developers to implement `Configuration` inside components, in order to be compliant with the __CMS architecture__.

Reviewer 2: I think the first thing is not about the CMS, it's about making the application configurable dynamically. The CMS is a way to ease the creation of this configuration override, but that's not mandatory. It would be interesting to develop "When do I want to build configurability in my application and why" and then go on the How which is already part of this file

> This will give the possibility to __Business Analyst__ to configure the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will give the possibility to __Business Analysts__ to configure the
```

> ## Component config types

Reviewer: Remark for this:
![image](https://github.com/AmadeusITGroup/otter/assets/110408057/754d7d90-e3d2-4384-8a05-66747ccd5b15)
There is a missing article or plural

### Default configuration

- Each __configurable component__ will have a default configuration which will be defined in _.config.ts_ file associated to the
  component

> > __WARNING__ the field name 'id' should not be used in the configuration, as we created a unique one for the entity configuration store

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> [!WARNING]
> The field name 'id' should not be used in the configuration, as we created a unique one for the entity configuration store.
```

### Default configuration

> - Each __configurable component__ will have a default configuration which will be defined in _.config.ts_ file associated to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Each __configurable component__ will have a default configuration which will be defined in ``.config.ts`` file associated to the
```

  component

> [!WARNING]
> The field name 'id' should not be used in the configuration, as we created a unique one for the entity configuration store.

### Configuration coming from config store

- Each __configurable component__ can have a customized config (compliant with the store model). This custom config can be
  asynchronously loaded from a backend server, or it can be injected in the body tag of the app. In both cases, this
  content will be used to update the store.

> - If present, it will override the default config. (Don't worry about the implementation now, we'll see it later)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If present, it will override the default config. Don't worry about the implementation now, we'll see it later.
```

### Global config

> - The common configuration is the one used in multiple components (it can be a date format, price display, type of input

Reviewer: I would put emphasis on the "common configuration" via bold text and put the inside of the parenthesis in a separate.
The type of input is really unclear and would leave out this example if we don't make it cleare. (I finally got the idea that it might be the presentation of the angular inputs)

  form fields from an Angular material input element ...)

> - A common configuration is defined in every library. The application common configuration (__global config__) will be

Reviewer: __merge of all common__ configurations. => __merge of all the common configurations__. ?

>   the result of the __merge of all common__ configurations.

Author: ```suggestion
  the result of the __merge of all the common__ configurations.
```

> - The common configuration is __not overridden__ at component type (there will be no properties with the same name in

Reviewer: Missing comma line 60

__The priorities for the config__:

- the highest priority is the one passed as input from a parent component
- the second priority is the priority by component id set in the store
- the lowest priority is the default config set on component (in the config.ts file of the component)

## Cases we handle

### Static configuration (override)

- The default configuration is extracted by __@o3r/components:extractor__ and bundled in a JSON file

- From this file we extract and modify the components configurations we want to customize, and we create a new JSON file.

> 

Reviewer: line 81: `` instead of _

### Dynamic configuration

- The default configuration is extracted by __@o3r/components:extractor__ and bundled in a JSON file will be exposed in the CMS

> - In the CMS plugin the Business Analyst will modify configuration of components and this ones will be exposed (in the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- In the CMS plugin the Business Analyst will modify the configuration of components which will be exposed (in the
```

  server) as dynamic content of the app

> - The application will do an HTTP call, to get the custom config and inject it in the store.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The application will do an HTTP call to get the custom config and inject it in the store.
```

> __No need of rebuild/redeploy the app__

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
__No need to rebuild/redeploy the app__
```

## Config types lib/app

- At __library__ level we have the config for components (__blocks, components, elements__).

A block component class should specify __Block__ for __componentType__ in the __O3rComponent__ to be identified by the extractor.
```typescript
@O3rComponent({
  componentType: 'Block'
})
@Component({
  selector: 'o3r-block',
  template: ''
})
export class BlockComponent {}
```

- At application level:

__Page config__ - each page component class should specify __Block__ for __componentType__ in the __O3rComponent__ to be identified by the extractor.
```typescript
@O3rComponent({
  componentType: 'Page'
})
@Component({
  selector: 'o3r-page',
  template: ''
})
export class PageComponent {}
```

__Application config__
The application can have 2 types of configs depending on the use cases: __pre-bootstrap__ and __runtime (post-bootstrap)__ config

Pre-bootstrap config

> - Defined in one interface which will extend __AppBuildConfiguration__ interface available in __@o3r/core__ in order

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Defined in one interface which will extend the __AppBuildConfiguration__ interface available in __@o3r/core__ in order
```

>   to be identified by extractor

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  to be identified by the extractor
```

> - PreBootstrap config object is used for configurations needed before loading the angular app component, and it will be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- PreBootstrap config object is used for configurations needed before loading the Angular app component, and it will be
```

>   injected by the cms in the index.html body tag data-bootstrapconfig as a data attribute

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  injected by the CMS in the index.html body tag data-bootstrapconfig as a data attribute
```

Runtime config

- Defined in one interface which will extend __AppRuntimeConfiguration__  interface available in __@o3r/core__ in order to
  be identified by extractor
- The object defined here is used as configuration for the application (ex: angular material form field appearance global on the app)

## How to develop configuration

> [!NOTE]
> You project needs to depends on `@o3r/configuration`
> To install it run `ng add @o3r/configuration`

### To generate a component with configuration

```shell
ng g component ComponentName --useOtterConfig
```

> ### To generate configuration to an existing component

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### To generate configuration in an existing component
```

```shell
ng g @o3r/configuration:add-config --path="/path/to/the/component/class.component.ts"
```

## Examples

### Default config

Possible example of default config file for a component.

> You can have a look at [configuration types supported by cms extractor](./CONFIGURATION_SUPPORTED_EXTRACTOR.md) for more

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can have a look at [configuration types supported by CMS extractor](./CONFIGURATION_SUPPORTED_EXTRACTOR.md) for more
```

### Dynamic configuration

> - The default configuration is extracted by __@o3r/components:extractor__ and bundled in a JSON file will be exposed in the CMS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The default configuration is extracted by __@o3r/components:extractor__ and bundled in a JSON file which will be exposed in the CMS
```

- In the CMS plugin the Business Analyst will modify the configuration of components which will be exposed (in the
  server) as dynamic content of the app

- The application will do an HTTP call to get the custom config and inject it in the store.

__No need to rebuild/redeploy the app__

## Config types lib/app

> - At __library__ level we have the config for components (__blocks, components, elements__).

Reviewer: Make a reference to the page where these terms are defined

Reviewer: It is a bit weird you only mention an example with a block component, but this is not the only case. The pattern is also true for exposed components etc.

A block component class should specify __Block__ for __componentType__ in the __O3rComponent__ to be identified by the extractor.
```typescript
@O3rComponent({
  componentType: 'Block'
})
@Component({
  selector: 'o3r-block',
  template: ''
})
export class BlockComponent {}
```

- At application level:

__Page config__ - each page component class should specify __Block__ for __componentType__ in the __O3rComponent__ to be identified by the extractor.
```typescript
@O3rComponent({
  componentType: 'Page'
})
@Component({
  selector: 'o3r-page',
  template: ''
})
export class PageComponent {}
```

__Application config__

> The application can have 2 types of configs depending on the use cases: __pre-bootstrap__ and __runtime (post-bootstrap)__ config

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The application can have 2 types of configuration depending on the use cases: __pre-bootstrap__ and __runtime (post-bootstrap)__.
```

Pre-bootstrap config

> - Defined in one interface which will extend the __AppBuildConfiguration__ interface available in __@o3r/core__ in order

Reviewer: line 132 : make it a header or something

Reviewer: same for line 139

  to be identified by the extractor

> - PreBootstrap config object is used for configurations needed before loading the Angular app component, and it will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Used for configurations needed before loading the Angular app component. They will be
```

Reviewer: Also do we have an example?

  injected by the CMS in the index.html body tag data-bootstrapconfig as a data attribute

Runtime config

- Defined in one interface which will extend __AppRuntimeConfiguration__  interface available in __@o3r/core__ in order to
  be identified by extractor

> - The object defined here is used as configuration for the application (ex: Angular material form field appearance global on the app)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Used as a configuration for the application (ex: Angular material form field appearance global on the app)
```

## How to develop configuration

> [!NOTE]
> You project needs to depends on `@o3r/configuration`
> To install it run `ng add @o3r/configuration`

### To generate a component with configuration

```shell
ng g component ComponentName --useOtterConfig
```

### To generate configuration in an existing component

```shell
ng g @o3r/configuration:add-config --path="/path/to/the/component/class.component.ts"
```

## Examples

### Default config

> Possible example of default config file for a component.

Reviewer: Either this is a sentence and there is a verb, or it is a header

## Config types lib/app

- At __library__ level we have the config for components (__blocks, components, elements__).

A block component class should specify __Block__ for __componentType__ in the __O3rComponent__ to be identified by the extractor.
```typescript
@O3rComponent({
  componentType: 'Block'
})
@Component({
  selector: 'o3r-block',
  template: ''
})
export class BlockComponent {}
```

- At application level:

__Page config__ - each page component class should specify __Block__ for __componentType__ in the __O3rComponent__ to be identified by the extractor.
```typescript
@O3rComponent({
  componentType: 'Page'
})
@Component({
  selector: 'o3r-page',
  template: ''
})
export class PageComponent {}
```

__Application config__
The application can have 2 types of configuration depending on the use cases: __pre-bootstrap__ and __runtime (post-bootstrap)__.

Pre-bootstrap config

- Defined in one interface extending the __AppBuildConfiguration__ from __@o3r/core__ in order
  to be identified by the extractor
- PreBootstrap config object is used for configurations needed before loading the Angular app component, and it will be

>   injected by the CMS in the index.html body tag data-bootstrapconfig as a data attribute

Reviewer 2: It's not injected by the CMS, there is no runtime interactions with the CMS, it's used as an edition panel for the customization and the files are exported in the dynamic content folder afterwards. We should advertise that this part is linked to a piece of code server side that updates the index.html and what requires to be added with an example

### Component file (*.component.ts)

> Here is an example of configuration in the component, note that dynamicConfig$ is there for the configuration service and config$ for the configuration store.

Reviewer: This is not clear why we have a difference for the service and the store.

### Component file (*.component.ts)

Here is an example of configuration in the component, note that dynamicConfig$ is there for the configuration service

> and config$ for the configuration store

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and config$ for the configuration store.
```

> This part is already handled by our [component generator](../core/OTTER_ANGULAR_TOOLS.md) if you are use it to generate your

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This part is already handled by our [component generator](../core/OTTER_ANGULAR_TOOLS.md) if you are using it to generate your
```

import {AREA_2_CONFIG_DEFAULT} from '@scope/area-2';
import {ConfigurationBaseService} from '@o3r/configuration';

export class AppComponent implements OnInit, OnDestroy {

  constructor(
    @Optional() private configurationService?: ConfigurationBaseService
  ) {
    this.registerDefaultGlobalConfig();
  }

  // As mentioned above, we have to merge common configs coming from libraries and to pass the result as global config to the store
  // The config service has a method which is doing this
  private registerDefaultGlobalConfig() {
    // Compute the global config based on all common configuration from libraries
    const global = {...AREA_1_CONFIG_DEFAULT, ...AREA_2_CONFIG_DEFAULT};
    this.configurationService.extendConfiguration(global);
  }
}

````

## Key takeaways

> The configuration mechanism is based on __Store Configuration__ and __extractor__.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The configuration mechanism is based on the __Store Configuration__ and __Extractors__.
```

> __Default configuration__ for a component is the one taken from the .config.ts file associated to that component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The __default configuration__ for a component is the one taken from the ``.config.ts`` file associated to that component.
```

- The config metadata is extracted and computed from the .config.ts file of each component

> __Static configuration__ is the one injected in the index.html of the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The __static configuration__ is the one injected in the index.html of the application.
```

> - The configuration is modified inside the CMS or by hand (implementation teams)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The configuration is modified inside the CMS or by hand by implementation teams for example.
```

- It will be injected as a data attribute on the body tag (data-staticconfig). At bootstrap, the value from the data attribute will be read and the store updated.
- It will override the default configuration

> __Common configuration__ is supported, but it cannot be overridden at component level

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A __common configuration__ is supported, but it cannot be overridden at component level
```

> - Extends the computed configuration (default + static) - no override as there should not be properties with the

Reviewer: This part is a bit weird, it looks like a mix between headers + list of properties for this part but with sentences as part of the header.

import {AREA_2_CONFIG_DEFAULT} from '@scope/area-2';
import {ConfigurationBaseService} from '@o3r/configuration';

export class AppComponent implements OnInit, OnDestroy {

  constructor(
    @Optional() private configurationService?: ConfigurationBaseService
  ) {
    this.registerDefaultGlobalConfig();
  }

  // As mentioned above, we have to merge common configs coming from libraries and to pass the result as global config to the store
  // The config service has a method which is doing this
  private registerDefaultGlobalConfig() {
    // Compute the global config based on all common configuration from libraries
    const global = {...AREA_1_CONFIG_DEFAULT, ...AREA_2_CONFIG_DEFAULT};
    this.configurationService.extendConfiguration(global);
  }
}

````

## Key takeaways

The configuration mechanism is based on __Store Configuration__ and __extractor__.

__Default configuration__ for a component is the one taken from the .config.ts file associated to that component.

- The config metadata is extracted and computed from the .config.ts file of each component

__Static configuration__ is the one injected in the index.html of the application.

> - It's the configuration which is modified inside the cms or by hand (implementation teams)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The configuration is modified inside the CMS or by hand (implementation teams)
```

- It will be injected as a data attribute on the body tag (data-staticconfig). At bootstrap, the value from the data attribute will be read and the store updated.
- It will override the default configuration

__Common configuration__ is supported, but it cannot be overridden at component level

> - Extends the computed configuration (default + static) - no override as there we should not have properties with the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Extends the computed configuration (default + static) - no override as there should not be properties with the
```
